---
title: EDU365 Teaching Young Children in a Diverse Society Final Project (Hypothetical assessments of observations of young yhildren from diverse backgrounds)
layout: post
categories: [JFKU Final Projects]
---
A  
The first problem that I have noticed is the lack of communication and support from Yolanda and the community of educators involved in the process of teaching Daniel. Because Yolanda was unable to read and write in Spanish or English, there is a significant obstacle to overcome when Daniel takes home school work and when attempting to involve Yolanda in the process of supporting Daniel’s education. Because Daniel acts up, there is a continuing build-up of frustration from Yolanda because she was unable to communicate with the teachers and the principle regarding Daniel’s behavior. Furthermore, Yolanda is a single mother. She also happened to move to the area as a result of a job transfer. This could imply that Yolanda and Daniel are not considered financial stable and may live paycheck to paycheck, adding to further instability and insecurity in the household. Yolanda must also rely upon Teresa to enroll Daniel in school and to communicate with the educators. This also adds to the friction of the relationship and learning dynamic for Daniel. What if Teresa is not around for the week and the teachers must pass on information to Daniel? Yolanda relies upon Teresa.  
The second problem is the misinterpretation of Daniel’s behavior and language competency with being deaf or perhaps having a language disability like his mother. So instead of being placed in a class of his peers, Daniel was placed in a special needs class for children with hearing disorders, speech disabilities, or learning disabilities relating to cognitive and physical motor dysfunction. There was a significant difference from when he was in the class for special needs and when he was placed in a normal class. There are many different factors at play here as to why Daniel began to act up in the classroom for the children without disabilities perhaps relating to the fact that Daniel is the only Latino in the classroom and the rest of the children being Caucasian and Asia, or perhaps the initial misdiagnosis of Daniel as a special needs student, or perhaps relating to Yolanda’s frustration and being a single mother without flexibility of schedule to fully support Daniel in his academic endeavors, but the problem persists as Daniel begins to exert his frustrations in the classroom.  
B  
Ms. Weaver is a monolingual English speaker. She is the principle of the school that Daniel attends. Ms. Weaver assumes that Yolanda is a monolingual Spanish speaker because she watches Teresa fill out the necessary forms to enroll Daniel in school. Ms. Weaver also assumes Daniel does not speak English like his mother and that conclusion was based on the lack of Daniel’s responsiveness to Ms. Weaver. Ms. Weaver may have also made this conclusion prior to his official assessment by Ms. Weaver based on the observations Ms. Weaver had made about Yolanda being helped by Teresa and from Daniel’s general lack of responsiveness. When Ms. Weaver made an official assessment of Daniel, she spoke loudly and slowly. She tries to get Daniel to write with a pencil as well as with flashcards to assess colors, numbers, and letters. On this basis Ms. Weaver made the decision to put Daniel into a special need’s classroom. Likely Ms. Weaver found that, in her professional opinion, that Daniel had some form of learning disability because of his withdrawnness.  
Yolanda moved to the area as a result of a forced relocation. She speaks Spanish but is illiterate. She is unable to speak English. She is also 28 years old and is the mother of Daniel, who is 5. Yolanda is aware of the fact that Daniel was excelling in his previous school of bilingual speaking bicultural teachers and classmates. Because of the lack of her ability to understand or speak English, she elicits the help of Teresa, her neighbor, to enroll Daniel in the new school. Daniel is acting out and is disrupting the classroom environment. Yolanda is confused and embarrassed about the situation because she cannot understand why Daniel is acting the way that he is. Yolanda probably has many concerns that are tied in with both her job, her speaking situation, the lack of social resources relating to moving to a new city, and the inability to communicate with Daniel’s teachers because of her language barrier. There could be a chance that Yolanda has no idea that Daniel is placed in a special needs program as a result of the inaccurate assessment made by Ms. Weaver. Furthermore, Yolanda cannot understand the needs of the teachers who may need to communicate important information to Yolanda concerning Daniel if Teresa, Yolanda’s interpreter, is not around to translate for Yolanda. We don’t know how often Teresa is around but if Yolanda must rely solely upon Teresa for information concerning Daniel then there could also be a sense of frustration there also. Likely Yolanda has also spoken with Daniel about his behavior in class. Maybe there is something that Daniel has told Yolanda and will not tell his teachers and that Yolanda could express on Daniel’s behalf.  
Teresa is the neighbor of Yolanda. Yolanda relies upon Teresa to be able to communicate to the principle and teachers. Apart from what little is said about Teresa, we can assume that Teresa has a positive relationship with Yolanda and cares for her and Daniel to some certain degree, because she is going out of her way to interpret for Yolanda and to help Yolanda enroll Daniel into school. She may hear concerns about Daniel from Yolanda concerning his acting out. Teresa may want to do something about it but could feel that it is not her place to intervene on behalf of Yolanda and Daniel. We don’t know the level of her interpreting skill so there could be a miscommunication that is happening between Yolanda, Teresa, and the school educators. Surely Yolanda was aware of Daniel’s academic performance and his previous school. And we can safely assume that Yolanda and Daniel speak Spanish fluently at home and that Daniel, according to Yolanda, does not have a hearing or learning problem. Then why was he allowed to be placed in a special needs class? Teresa may have miscommunicated the assessment by Ms. Weaver.  
Daniel is five years old. Daniel has just moved to a new town and is enrolled in a class where first, he was grouped with classmates that had learning disabilities and possibly other cognitive and motor dysfunctions. He may have begun to learn sign language in order to communicate with his other classmates. Daniel has historically done very well in school, specifically his previous school where the majority of his classmates were bilingual and bicultural. This situation where he has moved to a new town that may be mostly populated with Caucasian and Asians as a result of a forced relocation his mother endured in order to keep her job may be stressful to Daniel. Daniel, if he was excelling at his previous school, may then have exhibited different personality traits that he began to express at his new school. His withdrawn behavior and separation anxiety may be the result of the sudden change in his life. After being placed in a remedial classroom for three or four months, he is now placed in a new classroom where he again is forced to change and adapt. His acting out may be a result of a desire to see his mother where she is called in frequently to address the issue that Daniel is having. As a result of the testing that Ms. Ramirez gave, we can see that Daniel should have no trouble at all understand direction and guidance from his teachers. This is what leads me to believe that he is acting out due to personal and emotional issues he may be experiencing from all of the sudden change going on in his life.  
Mr. Choi teaches the classroom that Daniel is currently in. Daniel acts up in class and Mr. Choi had previously assumed that Daniel had such problems because of a possible hearing deficiency or the assumption that Daniel had a learning disability because of the assumption that Yolanda also had a learning disability. Mr. Choi, until Ms. Ramirez made the conclusion that Daniel was fluent in both English and Spanish, may not have heard Daniel speak much in class and may have seen Daniel remain withdrawn. Perhaps Daniel picked up sign language and began to communicate only in sign language with his fellow classmates. This could have led to further misunderstanding of Daniel’s situation. Likely Mr. Choi had attempted to speak with Yolanda and to communicate with her the problems that Daniel had been experiencing. Perhaps Mr. Choi also felt a sense of frustration like Yolanda in being unable to assist Daniel in class and then having to bear the burden of Daniel’s acting out.  
Ms. Ramirez may have also been shocked to find that Daniel was fluent in both English and Spanish. She may have also been in wonder that Daniel was placed in a special needs class for a period of three or four months given Daniel’s proficiency in both languages. There is no indication that Ms. Ramirez spoke with Yolanda concerning Daniel’s ability and that he would be placed in yet another new class because of the results.  
C/D  
The first opportunity would be a chance for interagency collaboration between the public school and the social workers. The cultural and language barriers could have easily overcome if the public school had a system in which multicultural social workers would come by the school and to assess a student together with the other teachers all the while allowing someone like Yolanda to be involved in the project to help Daniel become acclimated to the new classroom and to avoid misdiagnosis of ability. Having social workers involved in the school that have the ability to interpret language and to comprehend social culture would be of a great benefit to the schools. The creation of a system of social workers with multicultural backgrounds working with the school teachers and principles would be an opportunity to further enhance the education of children like Daniel all the while preventing disruption of the classroom. This program would help to reduce assessments on the basis of bias as in, for example, when Ms. Weaver and Mr. Choi assumed that because Yolanda could not read or write, that she had a learning ability that was inherited by Daniel.  
As far as we know it and on the basis of their actions towards Daniel, it could be assumed that Ms. Weaver and Mr. Choi have not had much experience with bilingual and bicultural students. On top of the solution proposed of an interagency collaborative effort, Ms. Weaver and Mr. Choi can head programs to deeper understand the many facets of multiculturalism. While the students have Asian minority students making up the majority of the classroom along with Caucasians, educational programs that emphasize the many different cultures that can exist in any given classroom can be integrated into the classroom. While there is no expectation for Ms. Weaver and Mr. Choi to learn Spanish, having a pool of resources like interpreters and other educators that are local and engaged to draw from would be incredibly beneficial to Ms. Weaver and Mr. Choi. Perhaps Ms. Ramirez knows other bilingual and bicultural social workers or teachers that Ms. Weaver and Mr. Choi could learn from.  
Having a network of bilingual teachers could help in the miscommunication that Yolanda experiences being confused and embarrassed as to why Daniel is acting out. Ms. Weaver, the special needs teacher, and Mr. Choi are likely experienced in the educational field. There is a large amount of resources that Yolanda and Daniel cannot draw from because of a lack of cohesion of purpose as a result of being unable to communicate with the educators. And Yolanda and Daniel both have an opportunity that the teachers could learn from – the expansion of a multicultural program that would benefit the teachers in their deeper understanding of the education of the future and for future students to adjust well and appropriately to the classroom which accordingly matches the student’s needs.  
In the meantime, a resolution can be reached by Daniel’s instructors and Yolanda. First, there needs to be a meeting put in place with all of the parties. Daniel will not need to be there. But Mr. Choi, the special needs teacher, Ms. Weaver, and Ms. Ramirez will need to meet with Yolanda to update Yolanda with the events that have taken place since Daniel was enrolled in school. An apology by Ms. Weaver on behalf of the school would be appropriate but not exactly necessary. Finally, a dual interpretation by Ms. Ramirez and Teresa would be called for in the expectations that the Mr. Choi and Ms. Weaver would have for Daniel. I would also propose that Ms. Weaver contact the previous school Daniel was enrolled in so that Ms. Weaver can get a fuller, deeper understanding of Daniel’s previous academic ability in order to fit him into a curriculum or classroom that most suits his needs. Finally, I recommend that Ms. Ramirez officially, with permission from her supervisor and with an official system in place for children like Daniel to have a “cultural liaison” in that Ms. Ramirez contact Daniel and Yolanda monthly or quarterly, ideally monthly, in order that Ms. Ramirez can pass on information from Yolanda and Daniel onto the school so that the school also has a channel of communication.  
Furthermore, I would recommend that Teresa also be implemented in this program, possibly with financial incentive in order to compensate Teresa for her time. I would recommend that Teresa serve as a form of cultural hub in which other members that are from the Spanish community could be contacted by the school administrators. These people that are contacted are the ones that have bilingual capability and are able to help the needs of Yolanda and other future at-risk students that are falling behind due to misunderstanding with both culture and language. The Spanish community acts as an extended family. Therefore Yolanda, Daniel, and other students and parents could rely on some members of this community through Teresa. There needs to be a qualification process for this in the form of a background check and language proficiency test but despite that process the author believes there will still be many candidates available for translation and interpreting skills as well as provide logistical support for Yolanda.  
E  
The first response by the teachers would be that Ms. Weaver simply speak to Daniel as if he were a normal child. In fact, he is. Ms. Weaver mistakenly assumed that Daniel was incapable of English because of the assumption that he was either deaf or had inherited a learning problem from his mother. Very simply, Ms. Weaver can begin to immediately build rapport with Daniel by speaking to Daniel like a normal child and on the same eye level. Ms. Weaver may soon learn that Yolanda is indeed a single mother, that she was forced to relocate here, and that Yolanda is experiencing some trouble adjusting to the new city through the use of an interpreter. Ms. Weaver may, through the channel of the interpreter, find more grounds for understanding and empathy through Yolanda and naturally through Yolanda, to Daniel.  
The second response would be to Mr. Choi, who could learn a few catch phrases and idioms common in the Spanish language, to provide for Daniel and to help Daniel absorb the culture shock of being in a classroom with only Caucasians and Asians. A simple “hello” or “how are you” in Spanish would very easily convey to Daniel that Mr. Choi is desiring to meet on a two-way street, instead of Daniel perhaps taking the mistaken view that Mr. Choi is against him. Through the use of simple sayings and phrases Mr. Choi conveys to Daniel that Mr. Choi is the advocate to Daniel.  
Finally, the third response would be to the unnamed special needs teacher. Understandably his or her superior made the conclusion that Daniel was a special needs child, but perhaps the special needs educator could stand to benefit by incorporating a secondary test in which the original assessor, the principle, in this case, Ms. Weaver, stands to be vindicated in her conclusion that a child is special needs or not. And on the chance that the child is not special needs, then all is well, the child is sent to the appropriate classroom. Furthermore, did the special needs teacher know that Daniel was from a Spanish speaking background? Also, then, like in the case of Mr. Choi, the special needs instructor could benefit from the learning of a few words and greetings in Spanish with the assumption that who knows? Perhaps Daniel would respond in Spanish and the special needs teacher could have stood to doubt the conclusion made by Mr. Choi and Ms. Weaver in that Daniel was possibly hard of hearing.  
F  
The first long-term response would be to, similar what was mentioned earlier with Teresa being a cultural networking hub, the school could develop a system that engages members of the community of the student that is currently enrolled in the school. For example, is the student from a culture that speaks the Korean language? Then outreaches to the local church or Korean business association could be made, a background check completed, and that person utilized to be a translator for the student as well as being an advocate for the student.  
A second long-term response would be to collaborate with other schools that have a diverse enrollment of students that have multicultural backgrounds. The students from other schools could organize events for the students and for the teachers where the teachers would meet other teachers in a professional atmosphere to learn from and to share teaching strategies. The students could also meet with students from Daniel’s school and “school pep” could be encouraged. Daniel and other students that feel marginalized could feel that though in Daniel’s situation he may feel isolated that it is not the end of the world and that opportunities abound everywhere.  
Finally, a third long term solution would be that, though the teachers may not necessarily enjoy it, a form of mandated training that is taken every six months in which the school collectively takes training online that teaches diversity and awareness of the varying levels of multiculturalism that exists in the modern public school today. In this format, a teacher would take a multicultural class that lasts no more than 45 minutes in a format that is distributed online. This method would reinforce desired behaviors from teachers that benefit the student and overall curriculum of the school.  
G  
The plan of action follows: Ms. Ramirez is now the official spokesperson to Yolanda. Teresa is welcome to join any event and discussion relating to Yolanda and Daniel whenever she likes. Ms. Weaver and Mr. Choi will continue building rapport with Daniel beginning with simple Spanish greetings. Now that Ms. Ramirez has illuminated the situation concerning Daniel and his normal abilities to speak English as well as Spanish, she will likely be interested in continuing to be an advocate for Daniel. So, Ms. Ramirez, Mr. Choi, and Ms. Weaver will collaborate to provide a goodness of fit for Daniel in his learning environment. Yolanda will cooperate with Ms. Ramirez on a more continual basis, likely a monthly basis in which Ms. Ramirez translates problems relating to Daniel and solutions in which Mr. Choi and Ms. Weaver will implement with the full understanding of Yolanda and Ms. Ramirez. The school will, until it finds a means for a community of cultural influences that will stand as a temporary replacement for the administrators until a network is built.