---
layout: post
title: PSY301 Psychological Testing and Assessment Final Project (My recommendation of the Fagan Infant Intelligence Test)
categories: [JFKU Final Projects]
---
Psychological tests can be fun. Those taking these tests can gain insights into an aspect of one’s personality that may have never been discovered if it were not for these tests. Or maybe the taking of a personality test can help you become more concrete on the personality traits you already have. It is the potential insight gained into a human being that makes a psychological test that much more important to humanity. But because of how important a test can be to someone, it is important to define and organize these tests into what they actually measure and how they are measured. These tests must also follow a guideline of ethics.

Purpose and Importance of Test Criteria  
Criteria are important because it gives both the test and test taker a defined set of expectations and outcomes. This is explained in each test manual as it gives the test administrator an understanding of the purpose of the test, how to administer the test, delivery of the test, interpretation of scores, and much more. These criteria are clearly explained in the manual and ambiguous words or phrases are discouraged from usage in the manual.  
I have included examples from each of the manuals I intend to compare and contrast as well as giving a brief summary of each of the criterion of the tests. This also means that I have merged parts one and two of the exam together.  
Purpose/Description of the Measure  
The stated purpose of the measure allows for the reader and test administrator to understand the meaning behind the test. The test specifies the domain and range of its stated purpose. Furthermore, it is important to know what the test is meaning to interpret. Questions on one test can be the same on another test, however those same questions may be used to measure a completely different issue. (Black, 1998) There can arise the issue of test bias if the test administrator is incorrectly administering the test based upon a faulty conclusion as to the purpose of the test.  
Comparison of Purpose/Description of the Measure  
The National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME) exam is an achievement test. It is designed to test the level of mastery related to the ability to “solve scientific and clinical problems”. (Guide to the Subject Examination Program, 2017) It also reflects “educational and development resulting from their overall medical school experiences.” (“Guide to the Subject Examination Program”, 2017)  
The Fagan Test of Infant intelligence measures the likelihood of mental retardation in infants, often quicker than having to wait years before parents can know if their child is developmentally mentally retarded. (Fagan, 2005)  
The ETS Major Field Tests measure the amount of information learned and retained by students in any major field of study. (“About the ETS Major Field Tests”, 2018) This test helps universities meet accreditation standards as well as pinpoint strengths and weaknesses of the curriculum.  
All three of the manuals attempt to provide sufficient reasoning as to what the test is supposed to measure.  
Author and/or Publisher  
Understanding the author and publisher helps test takers to see any potential bias coming from the author and or publisher. With knowing the author and/or publisher, a test administrator can see further bodies of work of the test creator. And finally, the author and/or publisher can be contacted in there is any further question as to the administration of the test. As demonstrated below, not all tests are created by a single author. Often times the test can be created by an organization or a board of creators or auditors.  
Comparison of the Author and/or Publisher  
The Subject Examination Program is written by the National Board of Medical Examiners. The Fagan Test of Infant Intelligence is written by Joseph F. Fagan. The Major Fields Test is written by ETS.  
Test Delivery Type  
Test delivery types vary. Sometimes it is administered through the computer or it is administered through paper and pencil. All methods of delivery have pros and cons. Sometimes a computer administered test can be confusing to the examinee who is not familiar with computers. However, not all tests must be in paper or on a computer. Listed below is the Fagan Infant Intelligence test, which is delivered through a computer program, however the assessment is in the form of pictures and the reaction of the infant. Although there is often times a learning curve to understanding the computer delivery test format, this method has an advantage in that students can often times view the results of the test immediately. Understanding in clear detail the delivery type allows the test administrator to prepare the classroom or select the classroom most appropriate for the test taker.  
Comparison of the Test Delivery Type  
The Subject Examination Program is delivered through a computer system that is web-based. It is proctored. The Fagan Test of Infant Intelligence is self-administered with a portable viewing stage and a set of test pictures. The ETS Major Fields Test is administered through paper and pencil and the use of proctors.  
Time Allocation/Limits for Testing  
Too much time given to an examinee may defeat the purpose of the test however giving the student too little time allocation can take away from the validity of the test as the test does not give enough time for the examinee to thoroughly answer questions. It is important to include this in a test manual as the test procedure becomes standardized across all test takers. This assists the test results to provide consistent results. For example, the Fagan Infant Intelligence test is not specifically timed, but is rather given a roundabout amount of time usually taken to complete the test.  
Comparison of Time Allocation/Limits for Testing  
The Subject Examination Program’s time allocation is dependent upon what courses are being taken. These tests can take anywhere from 2 hours and 15 minutes all the way to 3 hours and 45 minutes. The Fagan Infant Intelligence Test usually allots 15 minutes of time and generally not more than 25 minutes. However, there is no time limit. The timing of the Major Fields Test requires 2 hours of testing time, unless the testing is for the MBA, which requires three hours.  
Testing Environment  
Depending on the test environment there may be influences on the scores of the test. Some children do not do well in a foreign environment when taking a test for the first time. Also, depending on the location it may be distracting to the examinee and may also take away from the validity of the exam. The manual that provides information as to the testing environment often includes information such as seating arrangement, mood, and general conditions that provide the test taker with the ability to focus on the test with minimal distractions and inconsistencies as possible, such as cheating or being influenced by the other test takers.  
Comparison of the Testing Environment  
The Subject Examination Program is administered in a setting in which the subject gains access to the test through a computer. The computer downloads a plug-in that prevents access to other materials and to detect any recording devices on the computer. The Fagan Infant Intelligence Test recommends a small office and that the space be “pleasant and home-like as possible” (Fagan, 2005) The Major Fields Test is administered in a classroom setting and proctors are required to walk about the room quietly to ensure there is no misconduct. (“Major Field Tests Test Administration Manual”, 2007)  
Verification of Examinee Identity  
A test may not require verification of examinee identity if the examination is a form of self-assessment. However, for achievement examinations like the Subject Examination, it is necessary to validate identification so as to keep track of a progress of scores. For one, such assessments are usually used as entrance examinations for job or career prospects. Verification methods and accepted forms of ID may differ for each examination, so to ensure assessment consistency the manual includes information as to which IDs are accepted.  
Comparison of the Verification of Examinee Identity  
The Subject Examination requires a valid form of ID that has both your signature and your photograph. Names must match exactly. The Fagan Infant Intelligence test does not require ID as infants usually do not have IDs.  
Distribution To and Collection of Tests From Examinees  
If there are multiple version of an exam that is distributed in paper form then test administrators should be mindful of the order of test distribution. Manuals can include distribution methods such as stacked seating arrangements in an auditorium setting or including information as to distribute tests to ensure that all tests are distributed are also returned to the administrator. Since the actual tests are not owned by the administrator but are used under permission, the tests must be returned back to the author and/or organization or disposed of in the requested setting.  
Comparison of the Distribution To and Collection of Tests From Examinees  
The Subject Examination Program is administered online so collection and distribution is sent through a computer. The Fagan Infant Intelligence Test is administered through a CD and a series of pictures and is self-administered so the test is taken whenever the examinee’s parent feels ready to test. The Major Fields Test is presented in serial number order. This is to help ensure the tests you’ve received and distributed are also returned back to you in the same quantity. The collection must be administered in the same order it was distributed.  
Testing Procedures for Examinees with Disabilities  
Depending on the disabilities and the assessment, manuals include information on how to appropriately deliver tests to accommodate for disabilities without influencing the test validity. Sometimes, the manual states that examination accommodations follow a specific protocol to follow.  
Comparison of Testing Procedures for Examinees with Disabilities  
The Subject Examination Program allows for oral rendering of a web examination. This oral rendering however must follow the NBME Protocol for Oral Rendering of Subject Examinations and this accommodation must be made the same day the test is ordered. (“Guide to the Subject Examination Program”, 2017) Also, those with visual impairments may use screen magnification software to help them access the test. The Fagan Infant Intelligence test allows for no accommodations for disabilities. The Major Fields test offers a “large type, Braille, or audiocassette edition” of each test. (“Major Field Tests Test Administration Manual”, 2007)  
Testing Procedures with Limited English Proficiency  
Manuals stating accommodations for limited English proficiency may not relate to assessments involving academic achievement in an English speaking setting. Personality tests or overall intelligence tests have attempted to overcome this issue through the testing of patterns and shape recognition. (IPAT Culture Fair Intelligence Test, 2018)  
Comparison of Testing Procedures with Limited English Proficiency  
None of these tests accommodate for limited English proficiency. Both the Subject Examination Program and the ETS Major Fields Test are assessments designed to test achievement in an academic setting that was originally taught in English. The Fagan Infant Intelligence Test does not accommodate for limited English Proficiency because infants do not yet speak. However, an accommodation or translation could be made for the administrators of the Fagan Infant Intelligence Test because these administrators are usually parents and not all parents speak English as a first language.  
Test Security  
When assessments are measuring achievement, a manual may request information to be locked prior to testing to prevent the sharing of information. Or, the information transmitted through a computer could be encrypted to prevent the identification of test examinees.  
Comparison of Test Security  
The Subject Examination Program’s security is based upon the computers use of the plug-in disabling the use of aids and the detection of recording devices used on the computer. The Fagan Infant Intelligence test does not use security methods. The Major Field Test requires students to be tested under the use of a proctor, seated in particular arrangement as to prevent cheating and the prohibition of any items except the test booklets, answer sheets, and the pencil.  
Reliability of Test and Generalizability of the Results  
It may be necessary for the test administrator to measure results and to present that information to the test taker. In the case of the Fagan Infant Intelligence Test, reliability is explained in the purpose and description of the test.  
Comparison of Reliability of Test and Generalizability of the Results  
The Subject Examination Program scores based on a percentage of items answered correctly and is then compared to a reference group of previously took the test.  
Recommend a Test Manual  
Based on this data, I would recommend the Fagan Infant Intelligence test. This is based upon the lengthy summary and introduction of the test, its purpose, its background and its probability of success in detection of infants with disorders. I believe that furthermore, the ease of use of the test and its ability to properly instruct the test administrator was written effectively with the use of pictures and screenshots of the program that the test administrator, or parent was to use in the diagnosis process. This is also supplemented with a VHS training video that also further helps the parent and test administrator to administer the test effectively. Not only does the Fagan Infant Intelligence test provide ample reasons as to the effectiveness of the overall test, the Fagan Infant Intelligence test also provides for the explanation of the scores. Obviously this is necessary in a self-administered test but the manual is written clearly in a way that helps the parent to make a proper diagnosis. Furthermore, more dialogue is given on some of the common points of potential confusion a parent may have such as that their baby “doesn’t (or didn’t) seem to be looking at the pictures.” (Fagan, 2005)  
Overall, I choose the Fagan Infant Intelligence manual because the manual attempts to address the issues commonly found with parents as well as attempting to address the use of the program. The manual not only involves the manual itself but also includes a training VHS. The purpose and summary is thoroughly written with citations of the effectiveness of the test.  
  
References  
Black,&nbsp;P. (1998). Testing: friend or foe? Falmer Press.  
ETS. (2007). Major Field Tests Test Administration Manual.  
IPAT Culture Fair Intelligence Test :: Tests (personality, intelligence, achievement, vocational tests from the history of psychology). (2018). Retrieved from http://cdm15960.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/ref/collection/p15960coll4/id/8513  
Fagan,&nbsp;J.&nbsp;F. (2005). The Fagan Test of Infant Intelligence.  
NBME. (2017). Guide to the Subject Examination Program.  
 

http://aucmed.edu/AUC/media/PDF/student-services/OCSA-NBME-Core-Subject-Exams-pdf.pdf  
http://www.ets.org/Media/Tests/MFT/pdf/TestAdmMan.pdf  
http://infantest.com/ftii.pdf  
http://www.nbme.org/PDF/SubjectExams/subexaminfoguide.pdf