---
title: 'PSY389 Cross-Cultural Psychology (On Observations of my own life compared to a colleague's)'
layout: post
categories: [JFKU Final Projects]
---
Introduction  
Culture is the mechanism by which we view the world. “As culture is a meaning and information system, it is basically an abstraction that we use to refer to many aspects of our ways of living.” (Matsumoto & Juang, 2017) In this abstraction, or, culture, people hold views based on “values, beliefs, norms, attitudes, and worldviews.” (Matsumoto & Juang, 2017) Put two people together with the intent of having a discussion of an object or topic and you will find that they may likely differ. In this essay I collect the thoughts and values of myself and a counterpart I’ve randomly selected. In this case this is my coworker that I happen to be able to interview for the day. This essay will attempt to draw cultural distinctions between myself and him and to also find similarities between the two cultures in order to more fully understand the depth that culture plays on our understanding of the world.  
I am a 29-year-old Christian Korean-American. I was born in South Korea, Seoul. After about two years of age, my family immigrated to the United States, first touching down to New York City and then moving to St. Louis, Missouri, where I stayed and grew up until the age of 9 or 10. After I completed the fourth grade, my parents moved down to Augusta, Georgia for a year because of my father’s failed attempt at running a Chinese restaurant in St. Louis. We had moved down to Augusta because of some family members on my paternal family’s side was already living there. We only stayed a year because of some issues arising with my mom and my dad’s sisters. We then moved to Charlotte, North Carolina where I spent the majority of my teen and young adult life. At 26 I joined the United States Coast Guard. Finally, I was stationed in Galveston, Texas where I now reside. My parents are still together. I have a younger sister who is 8 years younger than me. My parents were authoritative.  
My counterpart is a 21-year-old man that was born in Alexander City, Alabama. At around two years of age, my counterpart moved three hours south of Alexander City, Alabama in order to be closer to his parent’s home town and family. In Luverne, Alabama, was where my counterpart lived from childhood to the end of middle school. After his parent’s divorce, my counterpart moved to Montgomery, Alabama to live with his father. During this period, he went through five different schools during two years because he was causing trouble in the schools. His father remarried a month after the divorce. He graduated high school at 16 after finally having settled on a military school. He then moved back to Luverne, Alabama to cut grass and to work in chicken grow houses. At 17 he joined the United States Coast Guard and was stationed to Miami Beach, Florida. At 19, he was again stationed to Galveston, Texas. He considers himself to be Agnostic. His father was authoritarian and his mother is what he would describe to be as “friendly”.  
My counterpart and I don’t get to spend much time together because he and I work in two different departments. But occasionally, we spend time together when we both must stand watch duties. Usually this involves staying in a small building together to check identification for the oncoming vehicles. This is usually a 10-hour shift. During this time, we usually pass the time through small talk and sometimes watching YouTube videos. He is usually quiet but I can get him to be talkative if I ask him questions on topics that he has interest in, like for example, bully dogs or raising animals to sell. Today I’ve asked him about his life and his culture in order to complete this project. He says he comes from a poor class and that he grew up with an authoritarian father. After I had asked him a series of questions I asked if he wanted anything from the store and he asked for a can of Copenhagen long cut chewing tobacco.  
Enculturation, Development and Cognition, Physical and Mental Health, Communication and Personality, Self-identification and Socialization, and Organizational Processes  
When I asked my counterpart to describe his culture, he used the words “poor” and “strict”. For the concept poor, I’ve discovered that the use of the poor concept is actually a part of social cohesion used by the Appalachia people, which Alabamians make up part of. (Tang & Russ, 2007) Specifically, the use of the low-class dialect by the Appalachia people being used as a marker and identifier of social cohesion. Historically, the Appalachia’s were difficult to travel though and telephone lines did not come into development in the Appalachia areas until nearly the 1950’s. (Tang & Russ, 2007) As a result, there was a greater need for dependence upon family, church, and community. (Tang & Russ, 2007) Furthermore, there was a greater distrust of strangers, “both individuals and organizations”. (Tang & Russ, 2007) When I asked my counterpart who he would ask for help in a situation of emergency, he said that he would first ask his parents and then to ask his church. Intergroup relations follow through the basis of kinship. My counterpart said to me that whenever he would bring home a girl, his grandfather would ask the girl “Who is your daddy?”. This is a typical attempt at a Southern tradition to further understand a person. (Willima, 1999) And typical of Southerners of the Appalachia, my counterpart described his home as a patriarchal family in which the father makes the important decision and traditional gender roles are supported, as in, the wife cooks and cleans. (Tang & Russ, 2007) My counterpart tells me of a story of his friend’s father that raised his daughter to bring him beer, in a practice to teach the daughter traditional gender roles. (Tang & Russ, 2007)  
I asked my counterpart where morality was taught and he said that he was raised a Baptist. He spent the majority of his young adult life in church. He tells me that there were concepts taught such as heaven and hell and that there were consequences to bad decisions. The Appalachia tradition of religion plays a major role in the development of moral values in the Appalachia people. (Tang & Russ, 2007) I asked him how he would go about asking for advice on life and career decisions and he told me that he grew up asking his family for advice first. This is not uncommon for his upbringing which holds the family in large regard. (Tang & Russ, 2007) I asked my counterpart how important politics was for his family. He said that it was nearly irrelevant to his upbringing and family. He said that he almost never talked about politics with family.  
As for me, family was incredibly important to me and there was an upbringing of teaching that involved the mistrust of strangers. My parents came to the United States and our immigration status had expired. We were on the illegal status for quite some time. Because of that, my parents taught me to stay away from authority figures like the police. I also remember going to immigration interviews and standing in line for hours and being treated rudely by immigration officials. All of this led to a distrust of strangers and especially to government officials. My parents also struggled with their concerns of me growing up being a Korean in an American society. Black Americans, along with Korean American parents, report “sharing similar worries.” (Choi, Tan, Hiong, & Pekelnicky, 2014) This concern of racial relations was reported to have been passed on to the children by the parents of those who also have experienced racism. (Choi, Tan, Hiong, & Pekelnicky, 2014)  
I experienced my parents telling me that parts of my life were influenced because of direct racism towards me as a Korean living in America. And this may have been in part due to the strong pride of racial identification of being Korean. Korean immigrant parents are known for this pride. (Choi, Tan, Hiong, & Pekelnicky, 2014) My parents also instilled in me a great need for education. This education was, in my parents view, worth the daily sacrifice they made for me every day, I was told. My father wakes up at 3:00AM to go to work and comes home at 7:00PM. He has continued to do this for nearly 15 years. And he makes it known to me that it is for my future success in education that he is willing to do what he does every day. Also, growing up my parents wished me to be as Korean as possible, so they would send me to Korean school on the weekends so that I could improve and maintain my heritage. They felt learning what it meant to be Korean was a good thing for me.  
Similarities  
Both myself and my counterpart have been raised Christian. So moral development and gender roles in this sense have been influenced by a Christian upbringing. Intergroup relations, peer relations, and parenting and family systems have also been influenced by a Christian outlook. Both myself and my counterpart spent significant amounts of time at church and that in both cases, majority of the friendships that were established were first originated in the church. For my counterpart, his extended family or kin was in the church and for me, a place to meet other Koreans that had immigrated to the United States. We also both have had upbringings where gender roles were conservative and heavily emphasized. We both also had a patriarchal family structure where the father made the majority of the decisions. The emphasis on family was great for the both of us. Advice about life and problems concerning life were always first addressed with the family. Also, the distrust of strangers and foreigners is common to both of us. Where my counterpart would have a mistrust towards government agencies and newcomers, so would my cultural upbringing also have the same mistrust towards government agencies and strangers. And because both of our cultures had a mistrust of strangers, we’ve both had to rely more heavily upon the family, peers, and the church for problems larger than ourselves.  
Although his culture of separation of others comes from a lack of ability to travel through the regional areas of Appalachia without great effort, I experienced a similar form of extreme inclusion of my culture by my physical differences as well as my cultural and language differences with other Americans that was similar to the geographical isolation of the Appalachia region. There is some form of discrimination experienced by the both of us as a result of regional differences. His is that he is sometimes ridiculed for having a Southern accent and he reports that others assume he is dumb because he talks slowly. This stereotype of Southerners having lowered intellectual ability as a result of merely being Southern and speaking with an accent is similar to what I’ve experienced as a Korean American, except that instead of assuming I am dumb, the stereotype impression of being Korean or Asian is that I am smart or that I am good at math. Filial relationships are highly emphasized and sacrifices are expected if it comes between work and education or personal success and family. My counterpart tells me that his family comes first and that such an expectation is held by all members of the family. I also have a similar context of family. I know that because my parents had sacrificed much to bring me to where I am now, that I am also to do the same for them when they grow older, and the same sacrifice to be made to my sister by me. The distrust of governmental forces comes from both of our historical events. My counterpart shares his experiences from the past American Civil War of federal government intrusion into the lives of the Southern people. (Tang & Russ, 2007) For me, my father grew up during the military dictatorship of South Korea. (Min, 2013) My parents grew up in Korea during this time and had experienced many hardships as a result of the military government.  
Differences  
I have an experience unique to my counterpart in that I am perceived to be a foreigner in the U.S despite having been here since I was brought to this country by my parents at the age of 2. My counterpart knows his hometown, has been to it, and there is no question by others as to the authenticity of his culture. Korean Americans can share a similar experience in that in the United States their “Korean-ness” is never questioned except by those that grew up in Korea. (Min, 2013) My counterpart has not had a struggle to learn two separate cultures in an attempt to mix them together. He has one culture and it blends into his larger perspective of the world.  
He is currently now, no longer Christian. He says that he is probably more Buddhist than he is Christian now. According to Buddhism, there is no God and there are no absolutes. (The Buddhist Centre, 2018) According to Christianity, there are absolutes. God being one absolute, and the concept of sin that has corrupted humanity being the second absolute. This leads to a wide difference between him and I.  
He does not recall his parents being worried for him because he was a racial minority. I on the other hand, have vivid memories of my parents being upset with the other children or with events that have had a negative effect on my life because of a result of what my parents felt were discriminatory behavior due to race. There is also a difference in the sense of association with Korean people that I feel when I see another person that I can identify to be Korean. There is a feeling of kinship merely based on the fact that he or she is Korean. I asked my counterpart if he feels the same way about Alabamians but he said that he did not, but he would feel there was a closer sense of connection if that person had also lived in regions and towns that he had also lived in, or if he knew friends and family related to my counterpart, which aligns with the study of Appalachia mentality of peers and family. (Tang & Russ, 2007)  
There is also some difference in the relationship of education and family. My counterpart tells me that if it came down to it, he would choose family over an education and that this would be considered an acceptable choice by his family. For my family this would not be acceptable as my parents consider the work they do in order to earn money to pay for my education would all be considered a loss if I were to choose family over an education. So, there would be pressure from my parents to choose an education over family matters because education is highly emphasized in Korean culture. (Min, 2013) My counterpart also has no experience in the pressure to choose an ethnic group identification like I have.  
Finally, I asked my counterpart what he would do if there were a problem that had to be addressed and he said that he would address the issue as soon as possible in order to avoid misunderstandings. For Asian Americans, specifically Korean Americans, there appears to be a correlation with being Korean and a high level of internalization of problems, which presents Korean-Americans or Asians at a higher risk for suicide than other ethnic minority groups. (Choi, Tan, Hiong, & Pekelnicky, 2014) I was taught that I should avoid problems and that discussing them could lead to more problems.  
Between myself and my counterpart I found that there were more similarities than dissimilarities, most of those dissimilarities having to do relating to race and immigration. We both have a very defined perspective of what an insider is and what an outsider is and both the outlooks on life are fundamentally Christian, though my counterpart no longer believes in a form of a Christian God, and the view of family as being of supreme importance is similar between us. The author wonders if it’s the element of Christianity that leads to much similarities between us two but that is the topic for another conversation.  
  
References  
The Buddhist Centre. (2018). What is Buddhism? | The Buddhist Centre. Retrieved from https://thebuddhistcentre.com/buddhism  
Choi,&nbsp;Y., Tan,&nbsp;K.&nbsp;P., Hiong,&nbsp;Y.&nbsp;M., & Pekelnicky,&nbsp;D.&nbsp;D. (2014). Race-Ethnicity and Culture in the Family and Youth Outcomes: Test of a Path Model with Korean American Youth and Parents. Race and Social Problems, 6(1).  
Matsumoto,&nbsp;D.&nbsp;R., & Juang,&nbsp;L.&nbsp;P. (2017). Culture and psychology.  
Min,&nbsp;P.&nbsp;G. (2013). Koreans in North America: Their twenty-first century experiences. Lanham: Lexington Books.  
Tang,&nbsp;M., & Russ,&nbsp;K. (2007). Understanding and Facilitating Career Development of People of Appalachian Culture: An Integrated Approach. The Career Development Quarterly, 56(1), 34-46. doi:10.1002/j.2161-0045.2007.tb00018.x  
Willima,&nbsp;S.&nbsp;I. (1999). Doing Business in the Deep South: A Guide for Internationals. S.A.M. Advanced Management Journal, 64(4).