---
title: M.Ed Capstone Prospectus (Exploring whether teaching a class on servant leadership causes statistical changes in sample population)
layout: post
categories: [WGU Final Projects]
---
Research Prospectus  
Kon Ham  
29JUL19

Capstone Prospectus  
Topic  
I am looking to understand the effects of teaching a curriculum on servant leadership on the self-perceived feelings of empowerment of a learner population within the context of their own organization. Servant leadership is not a new concept. (Gandolfi, Stone, & Frank, 2017) Servant leadership is characterized by leaders that exhibit the following skills: listening, empathy, healing, awareness, persuasion, conceptualization, foresight, stewardship, commitment to the growth of people, and building community. (Gandolfi, Stone, & Frank, 2017) A study by Columbia College indicates that the development of servant leadership skills can result in greater feelings of empowerment and development in the lives of the subordinates of those servant leaders. (Fields, Thompson, & Hawkins, 2015) Those newly developed servant leaders began to understand that significant impact can happen from small actions that would at first glance not appear to be leader-like. (Fields, Thompson, & Hawkins, 2015)&nbsp;  
The implications of servant-leadership are significant because we are currently experiencing a major shakeup in the ethical practices of large organizations, whether it is for profit or not for profit. The moral failings of Madoff, Enron, Tyco, and others are now on public display for all to see. (Gandolfi & Stone, 2018)  
A study conducted by Gallup indicated that 70% of the workforce is disengaged. (Morgan & Lynch, 2017) Because of the rise of such a crisis of leadership, a look at why leadership may impact disengagement in organizations, as leadership can have a significant impact on the lives of employees. Another Gallup study shows half of those that leave their jobs do so as a result of their supervisors. (Gandolfi & Stone, 2018) This topic is essential to me because soon, I intend to teach full-time. As a teacher, I am in a position to serve my students as a servant-leader. I am interested in this subject as to how it would potentially impact my current place of employment. The military has a high turnover rate. I am interested in teaching a servant-leadership curriculum and if it can influence levels of feelings of empowerment. This topic is relevant to the field of education because teachers are pedagogues. The teacher has a direct influence on the lives of their students. Servant-leadership can be utilized to increase student motivation and learning ability through the active use of the traits of servant-leadership. Servant-leadership positively correlates with student outcomes. (Noland & Richards, 2015) Since leadership is “the ability to influence a group to achieve a vision or a set of goals,” (Barnabas, Anbarasu, & Paul, 2010) those goals can be directed toward positive outcomes in students.  
Problem Statement  
&nbsp;The military is experiencing a high turnover rate as well as diminished job satisfaction. Specifically, at my place of work, there is anecdotally a low level of morale. Currently, there are many complaints that service members have on my base. The need for leadership is addressed at times but training specific to what leadership is does not occur, resulting in people feeling unhappy about their current situation. People do not feel empowered to raise genuine issues of concerns and to make a change about their duties. A learning curriculum on servant leadership so that individuals feel empowered to make a change in their work environment and to develop others to do the same is proposed.  
Problem discussion  
The military utilizes a top-down approach to leadership. Servant leadership approaches leadership through a bottom-up approach. (Savel & Munro, 2017) Furthermore, many organizations, including the military, are currently experiencing high employee turnover. The cost of this is high. (Sokoll, 2014) Studies have indicated that supervisors play a significant role in an employee’s retention. (Sokoll, 2014) Additionally, a survey of 7,200 people that have recently quit their jobs found that half of them left because of a bad manager. (Gandolfi & Stone, 2018) Employee values are changing. (Dutta & Khatri, 2017) Servant leadership is researched to determine if turnover and bad management styles can be corrected to increase feelings of empowerment in employees. Because leadership means many things for many different people, often the need for leadership is recognized but not clearly defined. As a result, addressing the issues of organizations in which people leave due to bad managers, or do not express enough loyalty to the organization to stay long enough to offset initial training costs to the organizations, is not addressed as a problem relating to leadership.  
Proposed Solution  
I propose that an interventional learning curriculum implemented into the organization in which I currently work. This learning curriculum focuses on the origins of servant leadership, its fundamental traits, and its potential applications within that organizational structure. I will begin first by portraying the benefits of servant leadership and its statistically significant correlations and associations with increased output, job satisfaction, and employee loyalty. Secondly, an examination of servant leadership’s historical roots. Because servant leadership is potentially an ambiguous concept, the traits of what a servant leader looks like is determined. Finally, applications of servant leadership to organizational management are determined to synthesize theory and practice. Servant leadership is associated with higher work performance. (Ebener & O’Connell, 2010) It is also associated with higher levels of loyalty to supervisors, which in turn reduce turnover rates. (Sokoll, 2014) And because servant leadership seeks to replicate more servant leaders, it is a self-sustaining system. (Ebener & O’Connell, 2010) This servant leadership is associated with job performance, organizational citizenship behavior, job satisfaction, employee commitment, and follower trust. (Kiker, Callahan, & Kiker, 2019) Finally, it is a system that can be taught to both the individual and the organization as a whole. (McMahone, 2012) The study and implementation of servant leadership can yield potentially great benefit from its theories. Each of the points of servant leadership will be divided into an 8-hour curriculum as outlined below.  
Introduction to Servant Leadership  
Defining Leadership  
Defining Servant Leadership  
History of Servant Leadership  
What Servant Leadership is Not (2 Hours)  
Benefits of Servant Leadership on an Organization  
Large Successful Companies Known to Implement Servant Leadership  
Servant Leadership and Correlation with Increased Productivity and Workplace Satisfaction (2 Hours)  
The Problems Facing the Future of Organizations  
What does the current organizational landscape look like?  
What is the impact of “Bad Leadership”? (2 Hours)  
Taking Action to Implement Servant Leadership and Concluding Thoughts  
What You Can do Now  
What a Positive Future Looks Like  
Questions/Answer (2 Hours)

A pre-test is administered to establish base levels of feelings of self-empowerment. This curriculum will be delivered in the unit training room, and the delivery device of the curriculum will be through the use of Microsoft PowerPoint. In between each unit will be a 15-minute break in between. At the end of the curriculum, a posttest will be administered to determine if there are changes in the levels of feelings of empowerment in the target class. Employee empowerment contributes to organizational success. (Greasley et al., 2008) Some studies indicate that empowered employees working in teams are essential to organizational success. (2008) The concept of empowerment defined as being &#8220;provided with a greater degree of flexibility and more freedom to make decisions relating to work&#8221;. (2008) The &#8220;central tenet is that workers respond more creatively when given broad responsibilities, encouraged to contribute, and helped derived satisfaction from their work.&#8221; (2008) Continuing, &#8220;organizational policies, practices, and structures that grant employees greater latitude to make decisions and exert greater influence regarding their work. This relates to the notion of power sharing between employers and their employees.&#8221; (2008) This study seeks to understand a developing relationship between servant leadership and empowerment, and whether empowerment as a dependent variable is affected through the teaching of a conceptual framework of servant leadership.  
Participants  
Twelve volunteers will be chosen to partake in my learning curriculum. They could potentially be from a majority of different regional locations, but will all share in common a military tradition in perspective to leadership and subordinates. They will all have had gone through basic military training and will have gone through petty officer indoctrination school for their leadership and specialized skill training. Less than 10% of my volunteers will have a college degree. Their ages will range from 18-48 and will be both male and female. They will have low motivation to my instruction because of the repetitive nature of other mandated training. Meaning that they will automatically assume that the learning curriculum that I share will also be of the same boring and repetitive nature. They will have had leadership training before, but none of them will have had training on servant leadership.  
Research Questions  
To what extent can my learning curriculum effect levels of self-perceived feelings of empowerment in my learner group?  
Data Collection and Instruments  
A 5-point Likert-Scale is utilized to survey the respondent relating to the 4 points of empowerment: meaningfulness, competence, self-determination, and impact. These four themes will be the core concepts I ask my target learners questions relating to their job and their position within the organization. The questions will relate to job satisfaction (impact), leadership (self-determination), professional development (competence), and purposeful behavior (meaningfulness). The same Likert scale will be administrated before and after the learning curriculum to determine if a change can be measured that is significant, statistically. Because I want to measure the feelings of empowerment, which is first a self-perception, a survey is most appropriate.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This research method is quantitative. I am attempting to determine a causal relationship between two variables: the dependent variable being the levels of feelings of self-reported empowerment amongst my learner group and the independent variable being the curriculum teaching servant leadership. Through a numerical data analysis to compare between my pretest and posttest results, I can determine a positive or negative relationship through correlation of my two variables, allowing me to see if I can affect feelings of empowerment through a learning curriculum.  
Data Analysis  
I utilize my Likert scale to determine the difference of the averages of the pre and post test to determine if a change in the self-perception views of empowerment has taken place. The pre-test indicates a base level that I can utilize as my control to compare with the posttest. The posttest should indicate to me any levels of change that I can compare with my control of the pre-test to determine if my curriculum had any impact on the learner group.  
Because my data is quantitative, I can determine a causal relationship through correlation of my two variables: my teaching curriculum and feelings of empowerment. Analysis will be made through the utilization of comparing the mean scores between the pre-test and post-test. The pre-test will establish a base line level of feelings of empowerment and the post-test scores will be averaged to determine if a change in baseline feelings had taken place after the learning curriculum. Both the pre-test and post-test will be averaged by the taking of the total score results of the participants and dividing those tests by the number of learners, in this case, 12. 

 References  
Barnabas,&nbsp;A., Anbarasu,&nbsp;J., & Paul,&nbsp;C. (2010). The Need for Awareness of Servant Leadership in Business Schools. Academic Leadership Live, 8(2).  
Dutta,&nbsp;S., & Khatri,&nbsp;P. (2017). Servant leadership and positive organizational behaviour: the road ahead to reduce employees’ turnover intentions. On the Horizon, 25(1), 60-82. doi:10.1108/oth-06-2016-0029  
Ebener,&nbsp;D.&nbsp;R., & O&#8217;Connell,&nbsp;D.&nbsp;J. (2010). How might servant leadership work? Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 20(3), 315-335. doi:10.1002/nml.256  
Fields,&nbsp;J., Thompson,&nbsp;K., & Hawkins,&nbsp;J. (2015). Servant Leadership: Teaching the Helping Professional. The Journal of Leadership Education, 14(4), 92-105. doi:10.12806/v14/i4/r2  
Gandolfi,&nbsp;F., Stone,&nbsp;S., & Frank,&nbsp;D. (2017). Servant Leadership: An Ancient Style with 21st Century Relevance. Revista de Management Comparat International, 18(4), 350-361.  
Gandolfi,&nbsp;F., & Stone,&nbsp;S. (2018). Leadership, Leadership Styles, and Servant Leadership. Journal of Management Research, 18(4), 261-269.  
Greasley,&nbsp;K., Bryman,&nbsp;A., Dainty,&nbsp;A., Price,&nbsp;A., Naismith,&nbsp;N., & Soetanto,&nbsp;R. (2008). Understanding empowerment from an employee perspective. Team Performance Management: An International Journal, 14(1/2), 39-55. doi:10.1108/13527590810860195  
Kiker,&nbsp;D.&nbsp;S., Callahan,&nbsp;J.&nbsp;S., & Kiker,&nbsp;M.&nbsp;B. (2019). Exploring the Boundaries of Servant Leadership: A Meta-Analysis of the Main and Moderating Effects of Servant Leadership on Behavioral and Affective Outcomes. Journal of Managerial Issues, 31(2).  
McMahone,&nbsp;M. (2012). Servant Leadership As A Teachable Ethical Concept. American Journal of Business Education (AJBE), 5(3), 339. doi:10.19030/ajbe.v5i3.7006  
Morgan,&nbsp;A., & Lynch,&nbsp;C. (2017). How the U.S. Marines Encourage Service-Based Leadership. Harvard Business Review.  
Noland,&nbsp;A., & Richards,&nbsp;K. (2015). Servant Teaching: An Exploration of Teacher Servant Leadership on Student Outcomes. Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 15(6), 16-38. doi:10.14434/josotl.v15i6.13928  
Savel,&nbsp;R.&nbsp;H., & Munro,&nbsp;C.&nbsp;L. (2017). Servant Leadership: The Primacy of Service. American Journal of Critical Care, 26(2), 97-99. doi:10.4037/ajcc2017356  
Sokoll,&nbsp;S. (2014). Servant Leadership and Employee Commitment to a Supervisor. International Journal of Leadership Studies, 8(2).