---
layout: post
title: JOT2 Issues in Instructional Design (Learning environment analysis)
categories: [WGU Final Projects]
---
JOT2 Task 1  
Kon Ham  
Student ID: #001160940  
Program Mentor: Ginny Huckaba  
Assessment Code: JOT2 Task 1  
April 22, 2019

  
JOT2 Task 1  
Instructional Setting and Content Area  
The instructional setting is held in what is called the training room. There are approximately 75 chairs facing a wall with a slide down canvas with which a projector can be utilized to display power point presentations and videos. Facing the audience is one podium upon which a computer can be set to be hooked up to the projector. Behind the presenter stands a large American ensign. This training room accommodates any potential need for the learners to absorb information through the use of the power point presentation. Electrical safety is a universal application – a room with the electronic equipment to present electrical safety and knowledge can be made adaptable to the workplace site.  
The issue occurs in attempting to make the training room a site that translates to all experiences of the service members that work at my base, as some service members at my base work as administration experts dealing with finance and payroll as well as some service members working with logistics and supply. Of the variety of service members, approximately half of the service members are considered engineers and work in environments that are traditionally associated with work environments that involve safety due to the amount of power tools used. In this case a traditional classroom with chairs and power point presentations are unlike the work sites used by the engineers of the base. However, these engineers are used to being in this room for training to further develop their proficiencies, so the environment is not completely foreign to them.  
Instructional Problem  
Enlisted members at my base are unable to articulate basic electrical safety standards. The target group is the number of attached service members at my base. Though not all of the attached service members at my base deal with potential electrical hazards, all members could benefit from a basic understanding of electricity. Such an understanding of electricity should increase the likelihood of compliance of basic electrical safety procedures that can benefit service members in public and personal places that conduct electricity.  
Instructional Goal Statement  
10 Service members on my base will be able to score a 70% or higher combined on both the qualitative survey and quantitative “true/false” exam which will indicate that the service member has a base level of understanding of electrical knowledge and safety. This basic knowledge will be acquired through an instructional curriculum which will allow the service member to score higher on the same test after administration of the curriculum.  
Requisite Entry-Level Knowledge and Skills  
The target population ought to be able to read and write on a level sufficient to undertake an assessment examination, previously administered in JNT2. This assessment indicates to me that they have entry-level skills required to read from a Power Point and to be able to take a post-test after the instruction. Furthermore, I assume that I can speak in a language that is biased towards military members, as I will be using military experience and background to make a relationship between the learning and the experience the other service members will have. I can safely assume that the target population has the skills necessary to understand my military language because of the fact that they have all passed the same obstacles that I have in order to be eligible to serve in the military, that being a basic ASVAB entry-level test as well as graduation of boot camp.  
Prior Knowledge and Skills  
There is little to no experience with electrical theory for most service members. The engineers that work at my base have a basic understanding of electricity – and that is only a conceptual idea of electricity. My needs assessment indicates that people might believe that they have an understanding of electricity, they find that they are unable to articulate this question verbally or through writing. There are only 4 members out of the 50-60 members on my base that have a formal training of electrical theory and safety. The rest of the service members are either ignorant to the topic or are mostly self-taught or from hand-me-down experience. There is one military-wide procedure that all service-members know of. It is the tag-out system. This relates to electrical safety because at all times when electrical equipment is to be used the tag-out system is utilized to ensure that all service members are able to identify procedures that are to be turned off and to remain off, or what electrical devices are found to be faulty and identified as such. The concern may be however, that though service members follow procedures for the tag-out system, they may not understand the value and importance of the tag-out system in that it can potentially save lives through preventative safety.  
Learner Group Unique Characteristics  
The learner group unique characteristics are as follows: 95% Western culture, 100% military culture, 12 of the 50-60 service members are female, and all of them are completely used to a monthly training and monthly staff meeting in the training room. The motivations toward taking this instructional course is very low. The majority of meetings and training held by the command and related personnel is viewed by those being instructed as “a waste of time” so the motivation toward my instruction is also very low. Furthermore, the attitude toward the instructional material is also very low. Workplace safety is a topic that is considered to be by most to be very dry material. Furthermore, though all of us use electricity on a very common basis, most people do not have an understanding of the theory behind all of the modern amenities we have now. Understandably, why should they? Most people are very busy with their lives and simply want those same amenities to “just work”.  
Accommodating Unique Characteristics  
I can accommodate for the dryness of the topic by including material that can be exciting for the learners in a way that makes a relationship between the knowledge and their own lives so that the learning experience becomes fulfilling and satisfying. Furthermore, because the majority of training is done in a typical “military” fashion in that material is presented to be dry and without humor and a strong sense of stoic professionalism, I can introduce a casual environment to the training center to promote a relaxed environment. Though likely as with all military procedures there is no volunteerism but only mandatory orders, I can craft the environment to be more casual and relaxed by presenting the information in a relaxed manner.  
Performance Context  
The target population will learn basic electrical theory and safety procedures in the training room where all meetings and training sessions are held. The service members that undergo this training will apply the instructional curriculum towards their own personal lives as well as work lives, where service members may not currently deal with work place safety, but will one day as a result of active duty deployment or underway naval trips. These safety procedures and basic electrical theory will also apply to their own personal lives in that they will have a comprehensive understanding of how electricity works and how it contributes to the many comforts of life, increasing their appreciation of electricity.  
&nbsp;