---
layout: post
title: Some Thoughts On Mindset; Peter de Jager
categories: [Mindset, Peter de Jager, Carol Dweck]
---
The word mindset &#8211; in what ways are you set in your mind? What concepts about life and your identity have become crystalized to you?

I often hear someone say, &#8220;oh, I&#8217;m not good at math&#8221; and I wonder, says who? 

Math is as natural to a human being, in that basic mathematical understanding is capable for any human being on the planet. Everyday we do math &#8211; most people are just not aware of doing it.

Perhaps you take milk with your coffee. You probably have a certain preference, a ratio, of how much milk to coffee you like. You might not be thinking of a very specific ratio, but you&#8217;re practicing math when you pour your ideal amount of milk into your coffee.

Your car tells you that you&#8217;re low on gas. You&#8217;ve done this before, so you tell yourself that you can afford to go home tonight and that tomorrow morning you&#8217;ll refill the tank. You can make estimations of future probability based on current data.

I was listening to a podcast from Peter de Jager. It is called [Truth Picks.](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/truth-picks/id1503232604) I believe the episode was #003, &#8220;It isn&#8217;t that they can&#8217;t see the solution.&#8221;

Peter makes a very good point about children. 

Children ask questions. All of the time. 

Many of them seem silly to us as adults. &#8220;Why is water wet?&#8221;

As adults we&#8217;ve crystallized our concept of what water is. To us, wetness is simply an attribute of the physical object known as water. To simply ask _why_ water is wet seems like a silly thing to ask.

But it&#8217;s in asking these questions, the challenging of assumptions, that can be valuable to our future as problem solvers. There are so many potential possibilities of improvement in our lives simply by asking seemingly &#8220;dumb&#8221; questions.

In terms of your mindset, ask yourself, &#8220;_why_ am I bad at math?&#8221; Perhaps you tell yourself &#8220;because I never engaged in fruitful practice of math.&#8221; Perhaps you tell yourself &#8220;because my teacher told me so&#8221;. 

Everyday people go about their lives as run into some kind of problem that occurs regularly. The coffee in the mug while driving tends to spill over while driving down a bumpy road. How long did it take before someone thought to make a cover for the coffee mug?

How long did it take people to figure out bread can be sliced? Once we figured out sliced bread was pretty useful, then came along _sandwiches_, a beautiful invention.

In light of this discussion, I encourage you all to ask yourself dumb questions and, to follow up with that dumb question with a good answer. 

Who knows, maybe you&#8217;ll be the person that eventually discovers the next sliced bread.