---
layout: post
title: DOM Notes from Team Treehouse
---
**As a note**, some of these notes are word for word from the Team Treehouse lesson. All credits go to Team Treehouse for the curriulum - I take no credit for any of the work below.

## The DOM
Reviewing JavaScript:
- Properties define the characteristics of an object
- Properties of an object can be access or set
- Methods allow actions to be performed on an object

The DOM (document object model) is an object based representation of a webpage. So on the basis of the above key points, we are able to manipulate the characteristics of the DOM object to get what we want.

The DOM is structured in a tree-like format. This means from the Document itself we can break down the element into further smaller structures that draw from its above structure or parent.

Every item in the structure is referred to as a node.

Each of these nodes are JavaScript objects.

You can have element nodes that draw from HTML tabs. You can have text nodes that draw from text.

When it comes to the mentioned structure of the DOM - the text nodes are the smallest children of the tree structure. There is no node that is smaller than the text node.

For browsers, the window object is the global object.

`document.body.addEventListener();` indicates that we are referencing the global object of `document`, targeting the `body` attribute, and then adding a method called `addEventListener()` that tells the object to wait for an event.

Let's add to this `addEventListener();`

```
document.body.addEventListener('click', () => {
    console.log('You clicked the body of the page!');
});
```

We added two argument into the method of `addEventListener();`
- The first is the string value of `'click'`. This tells the `document` object to wait and listen for a click (or a tap). 
- The second argument is a function that logs a message via `console.log()` upon the event occurance.

Let's add to that.

```
const body = document.body;

body.addEventListener('click', () => {
    body.innerHTML = '<h1>Hello, world!</h1>';
});
```

Here we've modified our previous code so that now `document.body` is being referenced in a variable named `body`.

We can now reference `body` instead of `document.body`.

What we did inside of this function was to call `body`, which holds `document.body` and then select the attribute of `innerHTML` and then to assign the contents of the attribute of `innerHTML` to now be `'<h1>Hello, world!</h1>'`

Remember, the browser is the global environment for JavaScript. Within that, we have the `window` that is the global object for the entire webpage.

Within `window`, we have `window.document` which acts as the entry point for the web page's content.

## Select an Element by ID
HTML requires IDs to be unique, so we can actually call those IDs using JS and DOM to target specific elements of a page.

`document.getElementById('headline');` - you can replace `'headline'` with whatever ID you are trying to select.

Like we did above, we can use basic JavaScript functionality to assign `document.getElementById` so that we can call the variable instead of the `document` and its accompanying method each time we need to manipulate it.

Like so:
```
const headline = document.getElementById('headline')

headline.style.border = 'solix 2px red');
```

We can go even further with this assignment and add an `addEventListener();` to the selection of an element by ID.

```
const btnUpdate = document.getElementById('btn-main');
const headline = document.getElementById('headline');

btnUpdate.addEventListener('click', () => {
  headline.style.border = 'solid 2px red';
})
```

The above stores two variables - both of which are the result of storing a selected element by ID.

It says that, selecting our button, we then want to call `headline` variable to then do useful work. The button click acts as the event upon which `headline` changes.

## Select Element(s) by Tag Name
Quick note: earlier we talked about select _an_ element by ID. _An_ as in singular.

Here now we are selecting elements _plural_. Understand that when we are requesting to see elements by tag it is usually a grouping of elements. If you try to select `.getElementByTagName` you will get an error. Emphasis on plural, or _more than one_.

Since we understand that we are selecting more than one tag, when we call `document.getElementsByTagName('li')` for example, you'll see that we are return a collection of elements. It looks like an array but understand what is being returned to you is also an object, which means it has characteristics and methods available to you. Specifically, this array-like collection of HTML objects is called an `HTMLCollection`.

Another thing to note. Because `.getElementsByTagName()` will always return back to you a collection of elements, that means even if there's only one element in your collection of tags, that means in order to access even the only element you'll need to use the `[index]` method. In our case, if we call `document.getElementsByTagName('button')` and we see only one element, we'll have to include `.document.getElementsByTagName('button')[0]` to target that element. Keep that in mind.

If then we've determined how to manipulate a single element in a collection of tags, then how will we manipulate all of the elements in a collection? Using a `for` loop, of course.

```
const items = document.getElementsByTagName('li');

for (let i = 0; i < items.length; i++) {
  items[i].style.color = 'orchid';
}
```

## Select Elements By Class Name
Sometimes you will want to be more specific in your selection of elements than all elements by tag and you'll want to be less specific than selecting each element by ID.

Classes allow us to set a collection of elements by an organizing class. Typically you define your own classes as you build your website.

Again, note how we are referring to collections. This means that accessing these elements will be similar to `document.getElementsByTagName()` in that you will have to access individual elements by the index - this also means you'll need to utilize a `for` loop if you want to make changes to all individual elements inside of a collection. Again, this array-like collection of HTML objects is called an `HTMLCollection`.

To select elements in a class, we'll follow a similar syntax as above:
`document.getElementsByClassName()`

Let's try a `for of` loop this time.

```
const = highlights = document.getElementsByClassName('highlight');

for (const highlight of highlights) {
  highlight.style.backgroudColor = 'cornsilk';
}
```
The `for of` loop has the advantage of being much more compact than the previously demonstrated `for` loops. And since it's a `for` loop, you can use it for many different applications, arrays included.

## Selecting Elements by Query Selector
`document.querySelector()` and `document.querySelectorAll()` are the most flexible of the selectors. They accept pretty much anything: IDs, classes, tag names, and any other valid CSS selector.

Let's assume you have a class of `toggle` and an ID of `headline`.

Recall that CSS identifies classes with the `.` indicator and a `#` to indicate an ID.

We must follow these conventions when using the `.querySelector` method.

Like the above selectors, we can do the following:
`document.querySelector('button')` to target a `'button'` tag. 

Using the same selector, we can go further to select a class:
`document.querySelector('.btn-toggle')` to target a CSS class of `'btn-toggle'`

And to select an ID:
`document.querySelector('#headline')` to target a CSS headline of `'headline'`.

Rinse, wash, and repeat for the `document.querySelectorAll()` method.

However, note that when we use the `querySelectorAll()` we are returned a different collection of objects. Previously we were being returned a collection of `HTMLCollection`. Now that we're using `document.querySelectorAll()`, we're being returned a `NodeList`.

For now, the differences aren't important to us but understand that _there is a difference between `HTMLCollection` and `NodeList`_.

If you want to generally know the difference between the two, here it is - 

`NodeList`s can contain both element nodes and text nodes. It can also respond to different iteration methods beyond just a `for` or `for of` loop like `map()`, and `forEach()`.

`HTMLCollection`s can only contain HTML elements. And you cannot necessarily loop over it as you would a regular array.

Finally, understand that a `HTMLCollection` is a live data structure where as `NodeList` is a static data structure.

This means that `HTMLCollection`s can recognize new elements and update itself regularly where as a `NodeList` will not.

If that doesn't make sense to you now, don't worry about it. Not a big deal and not necessary for this level of `DOM` exploration.

## When to use what?
It depends. For now understand that there are different tools for the job. As you begin growing in your knowledge of the tools and its application you'll have a more solid understanding of what to use and when. 

## Was this helpful?

Outdated information? Grammar or spelling errors? Just want to chat?

Contact me at [info.konham@gmail.com](mailto:info.konham@gmail.com)