---
title: 'PSY403 Human Sexuality Final Project (On Tumblr's ban on pornography)'
layout: post
categories: [JFKU Final Projects]
---
Kon Ham  
PSY403  
Find an Article Related to the Topic  
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/06/opinion/tumblr-adult-content-pornography-ban.html  
Provide a Description of the Selected Article and Issue  
A. Provide a Brief Summary of the Article  
Tumblr, a social media blogging platform has recently imposed a site-wide ban on pornography. The author explains that the original issue of the site wide ban was due to the child pornography that was being distributed on Tumblr. Continuing, the author says that while the issue of child pornography is a very serious one to consider, the author states that the ban resulted in an unintended effect, that is the marginalizing of L.G.B.T.Q members. The author gives anecdotal accounts of individuals that would not have know they were gay if it hadn’t been for Tumblr’s pornography and social media community. The author states that the ban was reactionary and that better ways could have been implemented to protect L.G.B.T.Q individuals while still abolishing the distribution of child pornography while contemplating the heavy handed approach of Tumblr’s decision.  
Provide a Brief Description of the Issue  
The issue is whether or not media has an effect on gender identity and sexual development. Tumblr imposed the pornography ban because of a concern that child pornography was being distributed throughout the site. The author notes that individuals have had their orientation revealed through the consuming of the various types of niche pornography that was on Tumblr. Although the author made no mention of underage users being able to access the site by simply falsifying their profile birthdates, it is very likely that children under the age of 18 had access to this pornography. And this could have had an effect on gender identity and development. There needs to be a determination on whether or not the anecdotal responses of the individuals that the author quotes from have any basis in scientific research. The author does not mention individuals under 18 using the site for pornographic purposes, but considering the ease of ability for an individual to falsify information when creating an account, this also needs to be considered into the overall impact of the site and whether or not the pornographic support group was positive or negative or introduced any sort of change in development at all. Of course the author’s perspective was that the pornography was a net positive for sexual development and gender identity, the author makes no mention the age group of which this sexual development impacted.  
What impact does the issue have on sexual development?  
The impact is that potentially pornographic use or consumption can lead to modification or changes in sexual development and or gender identity in both children and adults. According to the author’s use of anecdotes, certain individuals were able to realize that they might be gay. With such a realization one must consider potential hindsight bias as a logical fallacy, but the potential remains that a person could have discovered his or her real gender identity or another aspect of his or her fluidity of gender identity and sexual development. Can pornographic use change one’s gender identity? Can it affect sexual development? Without the assumption that it can affect development and identity, there is no criticism by the author of the ban implemented by Tumblr.  
What is the stance of the article in terms of the issue being discussed?  
The stance of the author is that pornography found on Tumblr was a net positive for individuals such as L.G.B.T.Q identified people. The author does not disagree with Tumblr in that there was an issue of child pornography being distributed on the site. It is Tumblr’s method in which the author criticizes, continuing that the method, while with good intentions, affects sexual minorities from being able to free share and explore their sexual identities. This stance by the author is that he or she believes that the type of pornography found on Tumblr was an advocate for women and sexual minorities and that such advocacy was a positive influence for such people. Specifically, the author states “…the voices of women and the L.G.B.T.Q. community — who pointed out that this change will destroy a safe space for self-expression, discovery and connection.” (Powell, 2018) Continuing, the author states “When tech companies tackle large-scale problems with large-scale solutions, underrepresented groups are often further marginalized as a result.” (Powell, 2018)  
Conduct an analysis of current research related to the issue  
Summarize some of the current research related to the topic  
Coleman in her review of Jordan and Romer’s “Media and the Well-being of Children and Adolescents”, makes note of chapter six of Jordan and Romer’s book in that beginning with the premise that “sexual identity is a key component of adolescent development in general” (Coleman, 2014) and that sexual media has been shown to have an effect in “physiological outcomes, attitudinal outcomes, and behavioral outcomes for youth”. (Coleman, 2014) Coleman notes that this is empirically backed data. Though Coleman notes in her review that the outcomes of sexual media consumption on adolescence as a whole is still up for debate, Coleman notes that also up for debate is whether or not sexual media can “provide healthy sexual socialization.” (Coleman, 2014)  
McKee in his study of whether or not pornography harms young people has noted that the results are inconclusive and that there is no empirical data to present the conclusion that pornography harms young people. (McKee, 2010) He also notes that pornography is not addictive and that there is no large generational difference in the amount of information a person has about sex. (McKee, 2010) McKee also mentions that due to ethical considerations, there is very little studies done on children as to the effects that pornography might have on children, so he makes note in his studies that most of the information compiled has to do with indirect research, for example mentioning that sex criminals have no more or less frequent use of pornography compared to others. (McKee, 2010)  
How does the research relate to the situation that was described in your selected article?  
The research relates in finding a conclusive answer as to whether or not adolescence in terms of sexual development and gender identity is affected. One research study assumes that pornography can and does have an affect on adolescence as a result of the stage in which adolescence involves key physiological development as well as emotional development, and another study assumes that the research actually indicates that pornography has no negative affects on growing children and adolescents. The author of the New York Times article suggests that L.G.B.T.Q and other sexual minority members are affected by the pornographic ban on Tumblr and the research relates in whether or not children and adolescents are affected by pornography. Tumblr is easily accessible by young adults. The author of the New York Times article suggests that the pornography itself was benign if not beneficial to the sexual development of people. I selected articles to discover if pornography is beneficial or if it has negative affects on a human. Of course, since the author approves of the Tumblr pornography ban because of the resulting distribution of child pornography on the website, her argument would be less effective if it were a known fact that a significant portion of the users of Tumblr were underage children.  
Discuss whether the research is consistent or varies by study.  
Due to the difficulties in testing and gathering empirical data on a longitudinal timeframe it is difficult to find conclusive answers to this problem. How will a researcher discover if pornography affects young children if it is unethical to introduce pornography to children? And how will one test the negative or positive effects of pornography while isolating the various other variables that make a person better or worse? The conclusion is that the research is inconsistent for a myriad of reasons. Ethically it is difficult to measure pornography’s effect on children. Secondly, measuring the effect on adults may prove to be difficult to replicate the typical setting in which one consumes the material. Clinical settings are not the typical place one may consider to be an erotic place. Thirdly, surveys also produce limitations due to the questions and the variety of bias a person may have in answering questions truthfully and honestly.  
Based on your review of the research, determine what future research you would propose regarding this topic, and explain your reasoning.  
My opinion on the matter is that future research need not be done concerning the effects of pornography and adolescence. Ethically I cannot think of a way to test for this without eliminating any potential confounding variables while at the same time ethically testing for this on young adults or adolescents. I agree with McKee in that young children express themselves sexually often times through play. My opinion is that sexuality is part of humanity. My only concern is that sexuality would increasingly play a larger portion of the experience of humanity than other experiences. Does defining one’s sexuality and gender identity and exploring that provide deeper meaning and fulfillment in a human being? I would like to propose a test in which scientists discover how important sexuality is in comparison to the other climaxes of human experience. I believe that from there in an indirect way we can ethically discover the impact of pornography on adults and children alike. Finally, the author makes note that not only is the article a matter of whether or not pornography is a positive or a negative on society and that sexual minority groups are marginalized, the author also states that there is a further issue of technological giants being unable to comprehend the complex needs of these people and that the various algorithms the companies use in order to implement the ban are still lacking in many advancements to be able to make appropriate judgement calls like for example, distinguishing child pornography from adult pornography.  
Reflect on the issue’s relevance A, B, C  
I believe that L.G.B.T.Q identity has become a much more pressing topic today. Furthermore, with the advent of technology, it has become much easier for young adults or adolescents or even children to send nude pictures of themselves through the internet. L.G.B.T.Q minorities press the importance of the subject of sexual and gender identity and the oppression by the so-called majority of heterosexual normativity. Legally, a child that willingly sends nude photos of him or herself to a recipient makes that recipient a criminal by law. That person is now legally at risk of being in possession of child pornography. There have been cases in which young boys have been charged with possession of child pornography because their girlfriends had sent them nude photos. On one end of the spectrum the government has increasingly paved legal rights to the L.G.B.T.Q minorities. Understandably the state has begun to listen to the voices of these minorities. What is to me, not very understandable, is the inability of the state to recognize the difference between child pornography and two young children utilizing the tools they have to express sexuality. The New York Times article laments the loss of Tumblr’s sexual minority pornography but there appears to be a loss for words for heterosexual children expressing themselves in that same way the author laments about. As far as technological groups holding the majority of sway in whether or not a sexual minority is able to communicate and to share ideas like niche pornography, the answer is always to decentralize. Tumblr, like the state in its heavy handed approach to handling sexuality by for example, assigning young men and women to felon status and forcing them to enroll in sex offender registries in a vain attempt to protect others from sexual assault and misconduct, has proven once that the state and giant technological companies like Tumblr, that hold an incredible amount of sway on cultural movement is incapable of wielding such a power to handle matters of sexuality with integrity and common sense judgement. No one doubts that sex involves intimacy and therefore a certain kind of power is imbued within it. My thoughts are that the government as well as Tumblr should hold no power over my sexuality and that they have absolutely no right to probe it. 

  
References  
Coleman,&nbsp;T. (2014). Amy B. Jordan and Daniel Romer (eds.): Media and the Well-being of Children and Adolescents. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 43(12), 2083-2087. doi:10.1007/s10964-014-0208-6  
McKee,&nbsp;A. (2010). Does pornography harm young people? Australian Journal of Communication, 37(1), 17-36. Retrieved from http://ncc1701.libprox.jfku.edu:8080/login?url=https://search.proquest.com/docview/883651489?accountid=25307  
Powell,&nbsp;J. (2018, December 7). Opinion | The Problem With Banning Pornography on Tumblr. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/06/opinion/tumblr-adult-content-pornography-ban.html